Intro

As many know by now, the invasion of Ukraine by Russia has been causing immense pain and suffering for the people of Ukraine, having displaced over 10 million people so far, 3 million of which have fled the country (as of March 23rd, 2022). They have moved mostly to neighbouring countries like Romania, Hungary, Moldova, Belarus, Russia, but mainly Poland, which has received the bulk of incoming refugees, and a small percentage of these end up in Western Europe or the rest of the world. Being such a big city with a well connected train station, Berlin is a main hub for the people coming from Poland who want venture further in the west. Many of the arriving families are travelling by train, carrying only what they are able to in a small suitcase, a backpack, a supermarket bag, or even arriving with only the clothes on their backs, for several days, and without a warm meal (or any meal at all).

Humble Beginnings

When seeing this scene so close to us, my wife Daiane got word from social media that bringing warm meals to them would be a good idea. We had some disposable containers at home, a couple kilos of lentils, legumes and vegetables, spices, and she started cooking. We broought the first batch of around 40 lentil soups to the central station, noticed it was very welcome, and immediately decided we could and should do a bit more. During lunch, we reached to a couple of Whatsapp groups to ask for donations, thinking we would gather a couple hundred euros and bring in the vicinity of a hundred meals a day, but oh boy, we were mistaken. The fundraiser immediately exploded, and we noticed something much bigger was coming our way, we had many food, material, instruments, and cash donations right away, as well as people offering their time and effort to work. Some neighbours of ours were detrimental to bootstrap the whole operation as well, introducing us to people in the food industry from the neighbourhood, and even joining us to deliver the second batch of the first day, of around 40 soups, on a cargo bycicle.

Quick Expansion

On the second day, a neighbour lent us a big 30 liter cooker, a neighbouring cafe helped me to get inside a Wholesale supermarket for our first big purchase from the donatives, while people started cooking at our house. These first few folks helping with the cooking ended up being the managerial core of the group, arranging shifts of helpers from morning to evening to produce huge amounts of lentil soup throughout the following days. After 80 soups were delivered in the first day, we jumped to 400 in the second. After cleaning up the vegetable and lentil sections in the neighbouring supermarkets, we asked for the people at the Zazza Cafe Moabit to help us with making a purchase at the Wholesale supermarket again, they did so, but donated everything to our initiative, not accepting payment :heart:

The Welcoming Commitee

The welcoming committee in the Berlin Central Station was all formed by volunteers, and, same as our operation, was very chaotic in the beginning, but quickly getting organised. What was only a couple of tables and people in the first day, became a huge operation with hundreds of volunteers ready to welcome the refugee families around the clock, providing food, supplies, and anything people would need when arriving to a new country after a long trip.

Coming to Stability

We quickly noticed that a larger amount of food would be very welcome, and prepared to produce 4 deliveries of around 200 soups per day (we never did so, but we were prepared to). When things got stable, I would wake up and start cooking at 7 in the morning for a first delivery at 10am, and people would take over for following deliveries at 2pm, 6pm and 10pm, but, as things got organised and more volunteers and restaurants started bringing food as well, on most days we were able to skip one of these deliveries, stabilising at around 700 portions daily. At the end we had three 30 liter pots cooking all throughout the day, line cooks chopping vegetables from 9am to 9pm, quickly migrating to packing the soups when ready and delivering them in huge boxes by car (when we had volunteer drivers) or using Uber when nobody was available.

In the eighth day (March 10th), we got word that the Berlin Senate would be taking over the welcoming committee and that all the volunteers would not be needed anymore, which would give us the Friday to rest and regroup, planning the next steps, as we imagined our cooking would be welcome somewhere else besides the welcoming committee. All these people had to stay somewhere, right? And a warm lentil soup might be welcome, even though not always in the same place. On Friday March 11th, the catering left, and an urgent ask for food was placed in the volunteer communication channels, we obviously resumed the operations and were able to deliver some 600 soups on that day, even though we started later.

The End

Daiane and Me were quickly reaching our physical and psychological limits at that point. Cooking at our house took a huge toll on our daily routine, house chores, my work and mainly, on our son, who was missing our company and attention. We had the offer to move our operation to an industrial kitchen at a nearby church, from a Brazilian Priest belonging to a Portuguese-speaking catholic congregation, and moved the entire operation there in the following Monday (March 14th), and started cooking in this new location on Tuesday (March 15th). We had contacts of people who were still needing warm meals, but we were producing too much, and noticed that a big scale operation like ours was not ideal. There was much trouble to deliver the soups cooked on that day, and it was almost by a miracle that we hadn't thrown a big batch of around 100 soups to the trash. Apparently all the refugee centers were organised enough so that they had enough food for everyone.

At the moment we still have a cooking operation in stand-by, with some non-perishable ingredients, materials and equipment in the local church, ready to resume if we see our cooking is welcome anywhere (even if not for Ukrainian refugees), but German bureaucracy is stopping us to make progress in that sense. This is not necessarily bad news, it means that the professionals took over and that the volunteers can take a break and go back to their regular lives.

Legacy

We heard a couple of heartwarming stories throughout the days, like our soup was very good and welcome, the volunteers and refugees really liked it, and it would even be preferred compared to the professional catering, but a very simple but strong story from the very last delivery day stuck with most of us. Some of the incoming refugees had a proper mobile connection and were in touch with each other on the way to Berlin, through social media and Telegram groups. We were told that some of them would arrive to the Berlin Central Station asking for the Lentil soup from the Brazilians, which was apparently a big sensation.

We all hope that peace will come soon, and that all of these families can return safely home for their regular lives, which might include rebuilding, and it might be anything but regular for quite some time. But, in ten, twenty or even fifty years time, someone will remember about that warm lentil soup that was welcoming them when arriving at Berlin, and that gives me comfort that we were able to do our tiny little part in the whole effort for peace and relief.
